  PROJECT  :  The Knot — A Probability & Simulation Engine
  AUTHOR   :  Tim Polkovnichenko
  COURSE   :  MIS 221

  WHAT THIS PROGRAM DOES
  ----------------------
  The Knot is a terminal-based simulation engine built around one idea:
  randomness, applied at sufficient scale, converges to mathematical truth.
  Each module poses a problem where human intuition fails and simulation
  reveals the answer. Modules escalate in algorithmic complexity, from
  basic Monte Carlo estimation up to graduate-level game theory.

  Concepts demonstrated: procedural programming, file handling, algorithmic
  design, dictionaries, lists, numpy matrix operations, probability theory,
  mathematical modeling, and game-theoretic self-play.

  HOW TO RUN
  ----------
  python3 main.py

  Requirements : Python 3.x, numpy
  Install deps : pip install -r requirements.txt

  Navigate the menu by entering the number of the simulation you want.
  Each simulation prompts for parameters, runs, and saves output to
  data/results.json automatically.

  SIMULATIONS
  -----------
  1. Pi Estimation (Monte Carlo)
      Estimates pi by randomly scattering points in a unit square and
      measuring what fraction land inside the inscribed quarter-circle.
      Prints convergence toward pi at every 10% milestone.
      Theoretical value: pi = 3.141592...

  2. Gambler's Ruin + Kelly Criterion
      Simulates a gambler betting $1 per round until broke or reaching
      a target. Verifies the closed-form ruin probability formula through
      simulation, then calculates the Kelly Criterion - the mathematically
      optimal bet fraction for any edge. Demonstrates why even a 1% house
      edge makes ruin nearly certain over time.

  3. Polya's Random Walk
      Simulates a random walker in 1D, 2D, and 3D space and measures
      return-to-origin probability across thousands of walks. Verifies
      Polya's Theorem: return is guaranteed in 1D and 2D (probability = 1.0)
      but drops to ~34% in 3D. Includes a live 2D grid visualization of
      a single walk's trail. Serves as the conceptual bridge to Markov
      chains - a random walk is a Markov process in motion.

  4. Markov Chains + Dark DNA Solver
      Part 1: Simulates a 5-state Markov chain and demonstrates convergence
      to a stationary distribution regardless of starting state.
      Part 2: Models the paradoxical family tree from the German sci-fi
      series Dark as an inheritance matrix. Characters travel through time
      and become their own ancestors, creating closed loops with no origin.
      Representing each parent-child relationship as a 50/50 inheritance
      matrix and multiplying it by itself 1000 times finds the stable
      genetic equilibrium - even though the inputs are logically impossible.
      The same mathematics underlies Google's PageRank algorithm.
      Note: the Dark ancestry model was originally developed as a personal
      side project and adapted here.

  5. CFR: Squid Game Marbles
      Implements Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) - one of the
      most powerful algorithms in modern game theory - to solve the
      marble-betting game from Squid Game. Two players each hold 10 coins.
      The hider secretly bets 1-10 coins; the guesser calls odd or even.
      Correct guess wins the bet; wrong guess loses it.

      CFR works through self-play: each iteration it asks "how much do I
      regret not playing differently?" and shifts probability toward better
      actions. Over hundreds of thousands of iterations it converges to the
      Nash Equilibrium - the strategy no opponent can exploit regardless of
      what they do. This is the same class of algorithm used by Libratus,
      the AI that defeated professional poker players in 2017.

      Stage 1 - Nash solve  : both players learn simultaneously via self-play
      Stage 2 - Exploitation: CFR detects and punishes exploitable strategies

  RESULTS
  --------
  All simulation runs are saved to data/results.json with full parameters
  and outputs. This file persists across sessions and accumulates run history.

  CONCEPTS DEMONSTRATED
  ---------------------
  -  Monte Carlo simulation and the law of large numbers
  -  Closed-form probability verification via simulation
  -  Gambler's ruin and Kelly Criterion (bankroll optimization)
  -  Polya's Theorem and dimensionality in random walks
  -  Markov chains and stationary distributions
  -  Matrix-based genetic inheritance modeling (numpy)
  -  Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) and Nash Equilibrium
  -  Game-theoretic self-play and strategy exploitation