Project: The Knot — A Probability & Simulation Engine
Author:  Tim Polkovnichenko
Course:  MIS 221 

    WHAT THE PROGRAM DOES

The Knot is a terminal-based simulation engine built around one idea:
randomness, applied at sufficient scale, converges to mathematical truth.
Each module poses a problem where human intuition fails and simulation
reveals the answer. Modules escalate in complexity from Monte Carlo
estimation to Markov chain analysis of a paradoxical time-travel family tree.

Concepts demonstrated: procedural programming, file handling, algorithmic
design, dictionaries, lists, numpy matrix operations, probability theory,
and mathematical modeling through simulation.

    HOW TO RUN

    python main.py

Requirements: Python 3.x, numpy
Install dependencies: pip install -r requirements.txt

Navigate the menu by entering the number of the simulation you want.
Each simulation prompts for parameters, runs, and saves output to
data/results.json automatically.

    SIMULATIONS

1. Pi Estimation (Monte Carlo)
    Estimates pi by randomly scattering points in a unit square and
    measuring what fraction land inside the inscribed quarter-circle.
    Prints convergence toward pi at every 10% milestone.
    Theoretical value: pi = 3.141592...

2. Gambler's Ruin + Kelly Criterion
    Simulates a gambler betting $1 per round until broke or reaching
    a target. Verifies the closed-form ruin probability formula through
    simulation, then calculates the Kelly Criterion -- the mathematically
    optimal bet fraction for any edge. Demonstrates why even a 1% house
    edge makes ruin nearly certain over time.

3. Polya's Random Walk
    Simulates a random walker in 1D, 2D, and 3D space and measures
    return-to-origin probability across thousands of walks. Verifies
    Polya's Theorem: return is guaranteed in 1D and 2D (probability = 1.0)
    but drops to ~34% in 3D. Includes a live 2D grid visualization of
    a single walk's trail. This module serves as the conceptual bridge
    to Markov chains -- a random walk is a Markov process in motion.

4. Markov Chain Simulator + Dark DNA Solver
    Part 1: Simulates a 5-state Markov chain and demonstrates convergence
    to a stationary distribution regardless of starting state.
    Part 2: Models the paradoxical family tree from the German sci-fi
    series Dark as an inheritance matrix. Characters in Dark travel through
    time and become their own ancestors, creating closed loops with no
    origin. By representing each parent-child relationship as a 50/50
    inheritance and multiplying the matrix by itself 1000 times, the
    system finds a stable genetic equilibrium -- even though the family
    tree is logically impossible. The same math underlies Google's PageRank.
    Note: the Dark ancestry model was originally developed as a personal
    side project and adapted here.

    RESULTS

All simulation runs are saved to data/results.json with full parameters
and outputs. This file persists across sessions and accumulates run history.

    CONCEPTS DEMONSTRATED

- Monte Carlo simulation and the law of large numbers
- Closed-form probability verification via simulation
- Gambler's ruin and Kelly Criterion (bankroll optimization)
- Polya's Theorem and dimensionality in random walks
- Markov chains and stationary distributions
- Matrix-based genetic inheritance modeling
- Numpy matrix operations for iterative convergence